# Transformers-and-NER
MSCF ML Capstone Project

# Background
Risk is a central component of all investments. One of such risk factors when dealing with credit products is counterparty default risk. Although counterparty default risk could be monitored through financial statements and market data, these data sources do not paint a comprehensive picture and usually come with significant lags.

From recent events such as the GameStop meme stock frenzy, public sentiment has been playing an increasingly prominent role in assessing financial counterparty risk. In order to fully assess the impact of public sentiment on the financial health of counterparties, risk managers would effectively need to cover as many news and media outlets as possible in real-time. This proves to be challenging, however, as risk managers are constantly inundated with a large excess of information that flows every day. This explosion of digital information and news channels has propelled banks and other financial institutions alike to pivot toward more data-driven and machine learning-powered approaches to extract relevant information on counterparties and manage counterparty risk in a timely fashion.

Pioneered by the Dutch bank ING, the Early Warning System (EWS) is the first effort of its kind to address the issue of monitoring live news and social media feeds and extracting entity-level sentiment for risk management purposes. The system involves caching live media feeds, analyzing text with natural language processing techniques, extracting both entity-level and document-level sentiment, and alerting risk managers of immediate risks of counterparties that they choose to subscribe to. Since its inception, the system has been a great success, leading many international banks to follow suit in developing their own proprietary EWS systems.

# Problem Statement
Management of financial counterparty risk requires a comprehensive understanding of the counterparty's financial health. One of the most critical sources from which risk managers obtain information about the counterparty is news and social media feeds. However, risk managers continually face the challenge of processing these news feeds in real-time due to the substantial increase in their sheer volume. In light of these challenges, our client has implemented a preliminary version of an AI early warning system designed to sift through real-time news sources, conduct sentiment analysis on mentioned entities, and alert risk managers of relevant risks.

In addition to performing sentiment analysis on entire text corpora, there has been growing interest in sentiment analysis and quantification of named entities within texts, encompassing specific companies to various economic indicators. Given that financial articles often express mixed emotions, methods need to be developed to effectively separate different sentiments associated with distinct named entities. For instance, an article covering the banking sector during a regional banking crisis may convey varying degrees of concern for small regional banks, mid-size banks, and traditional bulge bracket banks. While the existing literature on sentiment analysis has largely focused on a global approach, it is of immense importance to investigate and develop methodologies for more granular sentiment down to constituent entities.

The objective of this project is to experiment with ways to improve upon the early warning system the client has currently put in place. We will be looking at two particular aspects of this system for possibilities of improvement – sentiment analysis and named entity recognition (NER). Specifically, we will investigate the effectiveness of a variety of large language models (LLMs) in analyzing financial text sentiment and explore possibilities of expanding the capabilities of off-the-shelf spaCy NER models to accurately identify named entities and quantify entity-level sentiment.
